# Session 15: PE Ratios

## 元信息

- **序号**: 1
- **课程**: Valuation
- **处理时间**: 2026-05-16 01:07:15
- **来源**: 精修版

---

## 精修内容

# Session 15: PE Ratios

The most widely used multiple in the world is the PE Ratio. Everybody knows what the PE Ratio is, even people who might be novices in the market. But do they really know what the PE Ratio is? As we'll see in this session, there are widely varying definitions of what the price-to-earnings or PE ratio is. Some of those definitions make sense, and some don't. And as we will see, when you use a PE ratio, whether you like it or not, you're making all of the assumptions you were making when you did an intrinsic valuation. You're making assumptions about growth, assumptions about cash flows, and assumptions about risk. The only difference is those assumptions are implicit rather than explicit, and that can sometimes get you into trouble.

In the last session, I laid out a four-step process for deconstructing multiples, and I thought I'd try the process out on the most widely used multiple in the world, which of course is the price-to-earnings ratio, the PE Ratio. So here's what I'm going to do: I'm going to define PE ratios, describe them, analyze them, and see if I can apply them. The rubric we have for PE ratios can be extended to any other multiple.

Let's start the process. As I mentioned in the last session, the PE Ratio is internally consistent: the numerator is an equity value, and the denominator is an equity value as well. In fact, it's the one multiple that most investors think they know how it's computed. But do they? In fact, take a look at the PE ratio. The numerator is usually the current price; that's usually a consensus, though at times you see an average price or a moving average price used. But it's usually the current price. It's in the denominator that you get the real action. Here are the choices: you can divide by earnings per share in the most recent fiscal year (that's called current PE), you can divide by earnings per share in the last four quarters (that's called trailing PE), or you can divide by earnings per share expected over the next four quarters (that's forward PE). Or, you can divide by earnings in the year 2022, which is a really, really forward PE. Why would you do that? Desperation drives you to do strange things. If you're a sell-side research analyst tracking biotech companies and they're all losing money, here's what you do: you estimate the expected earnings way out in the future, and when it turns positive, you divide the price today by that earnings and you turn around and say that stock is cheap, it's trading at six times 2022 earnings. You can divide by earnings per share before extraordinary items or after extraordinary items; partially diluted, fully diluted, primary earnings per share; earnings per share before option expensing, after option expensing. What I'm trying to say is, for any company, you could probably write 15, 20, 25 different numbers, all claiming to be PE ratios at any point in time. What should you take away from it? The next time you sit across a table from somebody and start talking about PE ratios, before you start talking about the numbers, make sure you're talking about the same thing. Each of you should put down your definition of the PE ratio on the table and see if it matches up before you get too involved. So definitionally, price-earnings ratios pass the test, just make sure that it's defined in exactly the same way for the two people involved in the discussion.

The second step in the process is statistical. Here's what I do at the start of every year: I take every company for which I can find a market price—every company, I don't select the companies that I like, I just pick every company—and for every company, I try to compute a price-earnings ratio. You're saying, "why try?" You're going to see in a minute that not every company will have a PE ratio available for it. I compute these PE ratios by company, and then I draw a histogram. I don't know how much you remember from your Stat 101 class, but a histogram is not sophisticated. You just count the number of companies with PE ratios between 0 and 4, 4 and 8, 8 and 12, and so on, and you put it in a distribution. Here's my distribution of PE ratios at the start of 2013, but it's pretty much looked like this every year that I've done it for the 20-plus years that I've been doing this distribution. The peak is to the left, the tail is to the right. It's not a symmetric distribution. The lowest value a PE ratio can take is zero; the highest value, who knows?

Because the distribution is asymmetric, I computed the standard statistics for this distribution. I started with the two numbers we always do with any distribution: the average and the standard deviation. The average number for current PE for US stocks is staggering, it's over 80. But before that scares you too much, keep going down the table and you'll see a median value for the PE ratio. Notice it's about 16.5. That is a much more meaningful number to focus on if you're looking at PE ratios. In fact, in general, when you use multiples, avoid the use of averages. Those averages are going to be skewed by the fact that the outliers all lie in one direction. It makes far more sense to talk about medians than averages when you talk about multiples in general.

Notice also that of the 7,000-plus firms, only about 3,000-plus firms have PE ratios. What happened to the rest? There's a simple explanation: for a company to have a PE ratio, the earnings per share has to be positive. So for those companies where the earnings per share are negative, they drop out of the sample. So what? It matters because you create bias in your sample by the companies you eliminate as much as the companies you leave in. The companies that you eliminate because they have negative earnings will tend to be younger, riskier companies. And that's a danger whenever you take statistics of a subsample that is not an unbiased sample. In fact, as you go from current PE to trailing PE to forward PE, you lose more companies. You know why? To get a forward PE, I need expected earnings per share in the next four quarters, and the only companies for which I have that available are companies that are tracked by analysts. So any company that is not tracked by analysts, I lose from my sample. We introduce bias in the most subtle ways based upon the multiple we pick. So next time you pick a multiple to do a valuation, think as much about the companies you will lose by using that multiple as the companies that will stay in your sample.

Here's the third and final characteristic I want to list about these multiples. Not only are they asymmetric, not only does it throw off the median and the mean, but you look across the world, it's amazing how much more companies have in common. Again, at the start of every year, here's what I do: I take every publicly traded company listed globally for which I can get a PE ratio, and then I put the distributions on top of each other so you can compare them. I break them down into subgroups: US companies, European companies, Emerging Market companies, Japanese companies, and Australia, New Zealand, and Canada form their own subgroup. Look across the subgroups. You see the same kind of distribution: peak to the left, tail to the right. The median values do vary across the subgroups, but not in a way that might be predictable or easy to explain away. It is true that the US had the highest median PE in 2013. It's true that Japan had the lowest median PE. But it's also true that Emerging Markets had a higher median PE than European markets do, which is strange if you think about Emerging Markets as riskier than European stocks. But it shows you how the line between developed and emerging markets has blurred, especially over the last four or five years. So if you look at the distribution, keep in mind the asymmetric nature of the distribution, how it throws off your statistics, and how much more companies share in common globally than they have as differences.

Now that we've defined and described the PE ratio, let's move to the analysis. As I said, analyzing a multiple is not difficult to do if you remember that very simple rubric I gave you in the last session. I said if you have an equity multiple, which is what the PE Ratio is, go back to an equity valuation model, and the simplest one you can think of. The simplest one I can think of is a stable growth dividend discount model—it's the Gordon Growth Model. If you divide both sides of that equation by the earnings per share, you have an equation that tells you what the PE ratio for a stable growth, dividend-paying company should be.

And it tells you the variables that should drive that PE ratio. And guess what? There are three variables that drive the PE ratio for a stable growth, dividend-paying company. The first is the payout ratio, the percentage of earnings you pay out as dividends. The second is the cost of equity, reflective of the risk of the stock. And the third is the expected growth rate. PE ratios are determined by payout ratios, cost of equity, and expected growth rate. Now, some people are concerned when you see a dividend discount model because we know that most companies don't pay out what they can afford to in dividends. If you feel uncomfortable about using dividends, here's an alternative: use the potential dividend. We talked about this in earlier sessions. The free cash flow to equity is a measure of what a company can afford to pay out, not what it actually does pay out. Just replace the actual payout ratio with a potential payout ratio, and you've got the determinants of the PE ratio for a company.

How am I going to use this? As a first step, I'm going to take this equation and look at the variables that drive the PE ratio, and three very basic propositions emerge. Proposition one: other things remaining equal (and you can take a look at the equation to confirm this), the higher my growth rate, the higher my PE ratio. Makes sense, right? Higher growth companies should have higher PE ratios. Other things remaining equal, this is Proposition two: higher risk companies should have lower PE ratios. You're saying, "but most of the high-risk companies I know have high PE ratios." Well, most of them also have higher growth as well. But if you hold everything else constant, higher risk should translate into lower PE. And other things remaining equal, the higher the payout ratio, the higher the PE ratio. But remember, if you hold growth constant and you pay a much higher percentage of your earnings as dividends, you're generating a higher return on equity in your investments. So I would actually restate proposition three by saying the higher the return on equity for a company, the more efficiently it's delivering growth, and the higher the PE Ratio should be for the company. But as I've mentioned, holding other things constant is difficult to do. Companies with higher growth tend to have higher risk and lower payout. The big challenge in investing is to look at that balance. Is the net effect going to be positive or negative? Because that's what's going to determine whether a company is cheap or expensive.

Here's the other way to think about this. When I think about investing based on a multiple, I'm looking for mismatches. I'm looking for companies that don't fit the standard. What do I mean by that? Most companies that trade at low PE ratios deserve to trade at low PE ratios; they have high risk or low growth or terrible returns on equity. So what I would like in a perfect company, a company that I'd like to add to my portfolio, are the following: I'd like a low PE ratio (I'd like to buy something cheap), I'd like a high growth rate (because a low growth rate would explain away the low PE ratio), I'd like low risk (again, because high risk would explain away the low PE), and I'd like a high return on equity. I'd like a company with a low PE, high growth, low risk, and high return on equity. Now you might say, what chance do you have of finding something like this? Well, it might be difficult, but there's no harm in looking. In fact, if you ever screen for stocks—you take a big universe of stocks and you screen for attractive stocks—this is the framework you should think about for screening. Screen for low price (low price-to-earnings, low price-to-book, whatever the multiple is) and look for companies that have mismatches, that essentially should not trade at a low PE. In this case, I'm looking for companies with high growth, low risk, and high return on equity. It's an effective way of bringing relative valuation into your investment process.

So now that we've talked about the variables that drive the PE ratio, let's try it out. Let's take it for a spin. I'm going to try using PE ratios in a couple of settings to find cheap companies. First, I'm going to do what most equity research analysts do, which is do some storytelling. The sector you're looking at is the beverage sector. I have about 30 companies in the sector. I've listed out the price-earnings ratios in the second column, and you know what I'm looking for: I'm looking for low PE ratios. Track the table. There are three companies in this sector that trade at PE ratios below 10: one is Andres Wines, the second is Todhunter, and the third is Hansen Natural. They all trade below 10. That makes them cheap, right? Not so fast. Take a closer look at Andres Wines and Todhunter. You see why the PE ratios are so low? It's because they have the lowest growth rates in the sector. Now take a look at Hansen Natural. It looks much more attractive, right? It's got a low PE and high growth. But here's the catch: it's a really risky company. Now do you see the problem with storytelling? It's going to be a case of "on the one hand" and "on the other hand." At the end, I'm going to ask you to trust my gut.

Let me give you a slightly more sophisticated way of controlling for differences. I'm going to go way back in time to 1999 and show you the PE ratios for some telecom ADRs. ADRs are foreign stocks that are listed in the US and trade in dollars. Presumably, because they have to follow US GAAP, the earnings you see reported here reflect US accounting standards, so you're comparing apples to apples. I'm going to pick a particular stock in this table: Telebras. Telebras in 1999 was the Brazilian telecom company. It looked cheap. It traded at 8.9 times earnings, much lower than the PE ratios for the other companies you see for the most part in that sector. But there are two things that worry me about Telebras. One is, if you look at the column for growth, it has lower growth than many of the other companies in the sector. That's my first concern. The second is, even though these are all foreign ADRs, they range the spectrum. Some are from developed markets like Denmark; others are from emerging markets like Brazil. And in 1999, Brazil was a truly risky emerging market. So Telebras looks cheap, but it's also going to be riskier than the other stocks, and it has lower growth. As I said, storytelling gets you only so far.

So here's what I did. I went back to my Stat 101 book. I went to that chapter on multiple regressions. Like you, when that chapter was taught, I wasn't listening. I said, "When am I going to use this?" I think I found a use for it. If you remember your multiple regression, here's what you have: you have a dependent variable that you're trying to explain, and you have independent variables that you use to try to explain the dependent variable. My dependent variable here is PE; that's what I'm trying to explain. The two things that concern me are growth and risk. So I decided to run a multiple regression of PE ratios for these ADRs against the expected growth rates for these companies and a dummy variable. You're saying, "What's a dummy variable?" A dummy variable takes on the value of one or zero. In this case, I set it to one if it was an Emerging Market ADR and zero if it was a developed market ADR.

I ran the regression. Now, when you run a regression, the first two things you check are the R-squared, which tells you whether your regression is actually explaining something that needs to be explained, and the T-statistics, to see if the coefficients you have on the variables are statistically significant. In this case, the R-squared for this regression, after adjusting for the number of observations, was about 63%. That might not look good relative to your stat class regressions, but in finance, that's a pretty good R-squared. Both of the variables that I used were statistically significant. The coefficients then can be used to get a predicted PE. So here's what I did: I took the regression, I plugged in the numbers for Telebras into that regression, and when I plugged in the numbers, I got quite a surprise. I got a predicted PE which was well below 8.9; it was only 8.3. The stock looks cheap, but guess what? It deserves to be cheap. That is the essence of relative valuation. Just because a stock has a low PE doesn't make it cheap.

So as you look through the session, think about the four-step process: you define, you describe, you analyze. That analysis yields the variables you should be controlling for. And once you know the variables, you can use this multiple to compare across companies.